PEP 728: Revise proposal to spec the 'extra_items=T' idea (#4066)
python/peps: peps/pep-0728.rst

This proposal aims to support a similar feature without introducing general
intersection of types or syntax changes, offering a natural extension to the
existing assignability rules.

> We propose that we add a class parameter ``extra_items`` to TypedDict.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose to add a class parameter ``extra_items`` to TypedDict.
```

> It accepts a :term:`type expression` as the argument; when it is present,

Reviewer: Does this link work? Feel you need to put `typing:` in there somewhere to intersphinx to the typing spec.

Author: The link did work. I updated those references anyway because namespacing these with `typing:` seems to be helpful.

extra items are allowed, and their value types must be assignable to the
type expression value.

> An application of this is to disallow extra items with ``extra_items=Never``.

Reviewer: I'm not sure we should give `extra_items=Never` this much prominence. `closed=True` should be the only preferred and documented way to get a closed TypedDict.

Accessing extra items is allowed. Type checkers must infer their value type from
the ``extra_items`` argument::

    def f(movie: Movie) -> None:
        reveal_type(movie["name"])              # Revealed type is 'str'
        reveal_type(movie["novel_adaptation"])  # Revealed type is 'bool'
    
``extra_items`` is inherited through subclassing::

    class MovieBase(TypedDict, extra_items=int | None):
        name: str
    
    class Movie(MovieBase):
        year: int

    a: Movie = {"name": "Blade Runner", "year": None}  # Not OK. 'None' is incompatible with 'int'
    b: Movie = {
        "name": "Blade Runner",
        "year": 1982,
        "other_extra_key": None,
    }  # OK

Here, ``'year'`` in ``a`` is an extra key defined on ``Movie`` whose value type
is ``int``. ``'other_extra_key'`` in ``b`` is another extra key whose value type
must be assignable to the value of ``extra_items`` defined on ``MovieBase``.

The ``closed`` Class Parameter
------------------------------

When ``closed=True`` is set, no extra items are allowed. This is a shorthand for
``extra_items=Never``, because there can't be a value type that is assignable to
:class:`~typing.Never`.

> Different from ``total``, only a literal ``True`` is supported as the value of

Reviewer: Feel we should allow `closed=False`, just if people want to be explicit. However, the value should be a literal.

Author: Thanks for noticing that. If `closed=False` means that the TypedDict is non-closed, we probably still need to default to unset, because `closed=True` would be inherited. We can make `closed=False` equivalent to unset, but it might not be intuitive.

It is kind of tricky to define the semantics of `closed=False` without making it confusing, but there might be a better way around this. This might be a good topic to discuss in public for the next revision.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I see the problem; `closed=False` should be the default, so passing it explicitly should match the default behavior. A `closed=True` TypedDict could subclass a `closed=False` one, just as it can subclass a standard TypedDict without special options.

Author: I see. In this case, a `closed=False` TypedDict should be allowed to subclass a `closed=True` TypedDict, but such a TypedDict will remain closed as it inherits `extra_items` from the supertype. Could that be a source of confusion?

function parameters still apply::

    class Movie(TypedDict, extra_items=int):
        name: str
    
    def f(**kwargs: Unpack[Movie]) -> None: ...

    # Should be equivalent to:
    def f(*, name: str, **kwargs: int) -> None: ...

Interaction with Read-only Items
--------------------------------

When the ``extra_items`` argument is annotated with the ``ReadOnly[]``
:term:`type qualifier`, the extra items on the TypedDict have the
properties of read-only items. This interacts with inheritance rules specified
in `Read-only Items
<https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/typeddict.html#id3>`__.

Notably, if the TypedDict type specifies ``extra_items`` to be read-only,
subclasses of the TypedDict type may redeclare ``extra_items``.

Because a non-closed TypedDict type implicitly allows non-required extra items
of value type ``ReadOnly[object]``, its subclass can override the
``extra_items`` argument with more specific types.

More details are discussed in the later sections.

Inheritance
-----------

``extra_items`` is inherited in a similar way as a regular ``key: value_type``
item. As with the other keys, the `inheritance rules

> <https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/typeddict.html#inheritance>`__

Reviewer: Ideally for this we should use intersphinx links, not direct URLs.

Author: Updated the links where a close label is available. For the remaining ones, looks like there aren't exposed labels available.

and `read-only items inheritance rules
<https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/typeddict.html#id3>`__ apply.

We need to reinterpret these rules to define how ``extra_items`` interacts with
them.

    * Changing a field type of a parent TypedDict class in a subclass is not allowed.

First, it is not allowed to change the value of ``extra_items`` in a subclass
unless it is declared to be ``ReadOnly`` in the superclass::

    class Parent(TypedDict, extra_items=int | None):
        pass
    
    class Child(Parent, extra_items=int): # Not OK. Like any other TypedDict item, extra_items's type cannot be changed

Second, ``extra_items=T`` effectively defines the value type of any unnamed
items accepted to the TypedDict and marks them as non-required. Thus, the above
restriction applies to any additional items defined in a subclass. For each item
added in a subclass, all of the following conditions should apply:

> .. _inheritance-read-only:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _pep728-inheritance-read-only:
```
I believe these are global in the peps project, so we should namespace them for clarity. (Also need to change the place where it's linked from.)

    class MovieExtraInt(TypedDict, extra_items=int):
        name: str

    class MovieExtraStr(TypedDict, extra_items=str):
        name: str
    
    extra_int: MovieExtraInt = {"name": "No Country for Old Men", "year": 2007}
    extra_str: MovieExtraStr = {"name": "No Country for Old Men", "description": ""}
    extra_int = extra_str  # Not OK. 'str' is not assignable to extra items type 'int'
    extra_str = extra_int  # Not OK. 'int' is not assignable to extra items type 'str'
    
A non-closed TypedDict type implicitly allows non-required extra keys of value
type ``ReadOnly[object]``. Applying the assignability rules between this type
and a closed TypedDict type is allowed::

    class MovieNotClosed(TypedDict):
        name: str
    
    extra_int: MovieExtraInt = {"name": "No Country for Old Men", "year": 2007}
    not_closed: MovieNotClosed = {"name": "No Country for Old Men"}
    extra_int = not_closed  # Not OK.
                            # 'extra_items=ReadOnly[object]' implicitly on 'MovieNotClosed'
                            # is not assignable to with 'extra_items=int'
    not_closed = extra_int  # OK

Interaction with Constructors
-----------------------------

> TypedDicts that allow extra items of type ``T`` also allows arbitrary keyword

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TypedDicts that allow extra items of type ``T`` also allow arbitrary keyword
```
"allow" is right since the subject is plural

    regular_dict: dict[str, int] = not_required_num_dict  # OK
    f(not_required_num_dict)  # OK

In this case, methods that are previously unavailable on a TypedDict are allowed::

    not_required_num.clear()  # OK

    reveal_type(not_required_num.popitem())  # OK. Revealed type is tuple[str, int]

However, ``dict[str, VT]`` is not necessarily assignable to a TypedDict type,
because such dict can be a subtype of dict::

    class CustomDict(dict[str, int]):
        pass
    
    not_a_regular_dict: CustomDict = {"num": 1}
    int_dict: IntDict = not_a_regular_dict  # Not OK

How to Teach This
=================

The choice of the spelling ``"extra_items"`` is intended to make this
feature more understandable to new users compared to shorter alternatives like
``"extra"``.

Details of this should be documented in both the typing spec and the
:mod:`typing` documentation.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Because ``extra_items`` is an opt-in feature, no existing codebase will break
due to this change.

Note that ``closed`` and ``extra_items`` as keyword arguments do not collide
with othere keys when using something like

> ``TD = TypedDict("TD", foo=str, bar=int)``, because this syntax is already
> scheduled to be removed in Python 3.13.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``TD = TypedDict("TD", foo=str, bar=int)``, because this syntax has already
been removed in Python 3.13.
```
3.13 was released

where ``closed=True`` is required for ``__extra_items__`` to be treated
specially, to avoid key collision.

Some members of the community concern about the elegance of the syntax.
Practiaclly, the key collision with a regular key can be mitigated with
workarounds, but since using a reserved key is central to this proposal,
there are limited ways forward to address the concerns.

Support a New Syntax of Specifying Keys
---------------------------------------

By introducing a new syntax that allows specifying string keys, we could
deprecate the functional syntax of defining TypedDict types and address the
key conflict issues if we decide to reserve a special key to type extra items.

For example::

    class Foo(TypedDict):
        name: str  # Regular item
        _: bool    # Type of extra items
        __items__ = {
            "_": int,   # Literal "_" as a key
            "class": str,  # Keyword as a key
            "tricky.name?": float,  # Arbitrary str key
        }

This was proposed `here by Jukka
<https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-728-typeddict-with-typed-extra-items/45443/115>`__.

This will allow us to deprecate the functional syntax of defining TypedDict

> types altogether, but adapting to this proposal will make this PEP heavier.

Reviewer: I feel this isn't a strong argument; if this PEP is accepted, we'll be stuck with its behavior for at least many years, so we need to make sure we get it right the first time.

This proposal is nice because it also unlocks some other things that are currently awkward or impossible (keys that aren't valid identifiers), it has a few disadvantages:
- It's less apparent to a reader that `_: bool` makes the TypedDict special, relative to adding a class argument like `extra_items=bool`.
- It's backwards incompatible with existing TypedDicts using the `_: bool` key. While such users have a way to get around the issue, it's still a problem for them if they upgrade Python (or typing-extensions).
- The types don't appear in an annotation context, so their evaluation will not be deferred.

Author: Added the bullet points to this section in commit d146b98208925db3ce8ecf683b5c81dbc7d274c5. Thanks!
